In general, ecosystem services are ecosystem functions that are useful to humans (Kremen, 2005).There are several variations on the specific parameters outlining what it means to classify something as useful to humans, such as whether the benefits the services provide should be considered when they are direct, indirect, or both (Hermann & Schleifer, 2011).Assigning specific values to these ecosystem functions was the primary incentive behind defining them precisely. The concept of applying economic values to the benefits that the ecosystem provides was first suggested in the literature by Walter Westman (1977).His paper proposed the idea that quantifying the benefits provided by the ecosystem would allow for better informed management decisions involving certain resources (Westman,1977). Elrich and Elrich coined the specific term “ecosystem services” in 1981and since then many authors have debated the criteria for assigning values based on different scale, both spatial and temporal.
The Millennium Ecosystem Assessment proposed dividing ecosystem services into four different categories that have been generally considered acceptable for most management decisions in recent literature. The categories are supporting, provisioning, regulating, and cultural services (MA, 2005).Supporting services are those that depend on basic natural processes, without which they would not sustain themselves. These are core processes like photosynthesis and the water cycle (MA, 2005). Provisioning services provide direct benefits to people and are extracted from nature, such as livestock and timber (MA, 2005). Regulating services are processes like pollination and flood control that provide moderation for the other services (MA,2005).Finally, cultural services are those benefits that are indirect and often non-material, like bird-watching and other recreational activities (MA, 2005). Some authors believe that these categories are insufficient definitions and that these services have such complex interactions with each other that making a precise definition is nearly impossible (Fisher et al, 2007). The complexity arises not only in the ecosystem processes themselves, but in the interest levels of the various groups needing the values to make decisions and adequate comparisons (Hein et al, 2006). Therefore, authors like Fisher et al.
propose that a “fit for purpose” definition be applied, which is one that can create clear classifications based on the individual needs in the situation (2007).
An example of a major application of evaluating the worth of ecosystem services is the
National Capital Project, which is a combined effort between Stanford University, University of Minnesota, the World Wildlife Fund, and The Nature Conservancy to provide methods of valuing the services to management agencies around the globe (NatCap).A specific tool they provide to facilitate this process is called InVEST.InVEST is a software tool that uses various habitat modeling techniques to assess worth of particular areas based on future plans (NatCap).For example, if an organization intended to start a construction project at a particular site, they could input maps of their current, the projection of how the site would look in the future, data regarding the specific potential threats to the local wildlife, where/how the threats will occur, etc (InVEST).The software would process the input data and outputs information containing habitat degradation scores, quality levels, etc for before and after the intended construction project is complete (InVEST.This modeling method can be used for choosing areas best suited for acting as wildlife habitat as well as informing groups that could potentially degrade habitat (NatCap).
Another example that illustrates the importance of using ecosystem services values is in the case of the Lesser Prairie-chicken in Oklahoma. Habitat areas used by these birds as well as other great plains species was evaluated in the Southern Great Plains Crucial Habitat Assessment Tool and values were assigned to certain regions based on the concept of ecosystem services, which included the pros and cons of potential impacts on wildlife and benefits to humans (SGP CHAT). Specific dollar values were then given to particular areas based on their worth and organizations that intend to alter those areas will be required to pay per acre that they modify (Horton et al, 2010). Areas that have potential to negatively affect things like Lesser Prairie-chicken mating grounds or nesting grounds, for example, are valued higher (Horton et al, 2010).These quantitative methods can allow easy comparisons between areas based on the universally accepted standard of economic value. If one keeps in mind that the monetary values assigned are meant to be interpreted in terms of relative comparisons between different services, rather than strict dollar amounts, then the ecosystem service approach to improving management decisions can be successful in integrating economic and ecological entities for mutual benefits (Costanza et al, 2014).
References:
Boyd, J and S. Banzhaf. 2007. What are ecosystem services? The need for standardized environmental accounting units. Ecological Economics, 63(2), 616-626.
Costanza, R., de Groot, R., Sutton, P.,van der Ploeg, S., Anderson, S. J., Kubiszewski, I., ... & Turner, R. K. 2014. Changes in the global value of ecosystem services. Global Environmental Change, 26, 152-158.
Ehrlich, P.R., Ehrlich, A.H., 1981. Extinction:the causes and consequences of the disappearance of species. Random House, New York
Fisher, Brendan; Costanza, Robert; Turner, R. Kerry; Morling Paul. 2007. Defining and classifying ecosystem services for decision making, CSERGE Working Paper EDM, No. 07-04
Hermann, A., Schleifer, S., & Wrbka, T.2011. The concept of ecosystem services regarding landscape research:a r eview. Living Rev. Landscape Res,5(1), 1-37.
Horton, R., L. Bell, C. M. O Meilia, M.McLachlan, C. Hise, D. Wolfe, D. Elmore and J.D. Strong. 2010. A Spatially-
Based Planning Tool Designed to Reduce Negative Effects of Development on the Lesser Prairie-Chicken
(Tympanuchus pallidicinctus) in Oklahoma: A Multi-Entity Collaboration to Promote Lesser Prairie-Chicken Voluntary Habitat Conservation and Prioritized Management Actions. Oklahoma Department of Wildlife Conservation. Oklahoma City, Oklahoma.79 pp. http://www.wildlifedepartment.com/lepcdevelopmentplanning.htm (Accessed: 10/30/14).
(InVEST) Sharp, R., Tallis, H.T., Ricketts,T., Guerry, A.D., Wood, S.A., Chaplin-Kramer, R., Nelson, E., Ennaanay,D.,
Wolny, S., Olwero, N., Vigerstol, K., Pennington,D., Mendoza, G., Aukema, J., Foster, J., Forrest, J., Cameron, D., Arkema, K., Lonsdorf, E., Kennedy, C.,Verutes, G., Kim, C.K., Guannel, G., Papenfus, M., Toft, J., Marsik, M., Bernhardt, J., Griffin, R., Glowinski, K.,Chaumont, N., Perelman, A., Lacayo, M. Mandle, L., Hamel, P., and Vogl, A.L. 2014. InVEST User’s Guide. The NaturalCapital Project, Stanford.
Kremen, C. 2005. “Managing ecosystem services: what do we need to know about their ecology?” Ecology Letters, 8(5): 468– 479. 
Millennium Ecosystem Assessment.2005. Washington, DC, Island Press
(NatCap) Tallis, Heather; Wang Yukuan;Fu Bin; Zhu Bo; Zhu Wanze; Chen Min; Christine Tam; and Gretchen Daily.
The Natural Capital Project. Bulletin ofthe British Ecological Society. March 2010, Vol. 41(1), pp 10-13.
Southern Great Plains Crucial Habitat Assessment Tool. August, 2013. . kars.ku.edu/maps/sgpchat/
Westman, W. E. 1977. How much are nature's services worth?. Science,197(4307), 960-964.
